# Hybrid Mixed Integer Linear Programming for Large-Scale Join Order Optimisation

This repository contains code and data artifacts for "Hybrid Mixed Integer Linear Programming for Large-Scale Join Order Optimisation", accepted at VLDB 2026.

## Reproduction

### Build Docker Image

```
docker build -t vldb26-repro .
```

### Create Container

```
docker run --name vldb26-repro -it vldb26-repro [<option>]
```
The `<option>` specifies which operations are performed on container start.

Available options are:
* `all`: Runs all experiments
* `bash`: Launches an interactive shell

## Project Structure

Source code for our experiments can be found in the base folder. HybridMILPConvBenchmarks.py and HybridMILPScalabilityBenchmarks.py respectively apply our MILP method on queries contained in conventional query optimisation benchmarks (TPC-H [1], TPC-DS [2], LDBC [3], Join Order Benchmark [4]), as well as large tree queries generated by Neumann and Radke [5] to benchmark scalability to large query loads. HybridMILPScalabilityBenchmarksPostprocessing.py combines the partial MILP and Adaptive solutions into a complete join ordering solution. We rely on the Gurobi MILP solver, which requires user access data to be specified in config.py. The Experiments folder contains all queries and results yielded by our approach, including (1) the raw results produced by the MILP step of our method, (2) subproblems extracted from raw solutions to complete the optimisation of raw MILP results, as well as corresponding subproblem solutions, and finally (3) the complete results combining the raw MILP solutions and subproblem solutions. The Experiments/Thresholds folder includes cost approximation thresholds derived from the preliminary adaptive solution, in accordance to our hybrid method. Finally, the Scripts folder contains utility scripts, such as code to convert problems into the format required by the complementary adaptive method by Neumann and Radke [5], applied by our hybrid algorithm.

## References

[1] Transaction Processing Performance Council. 2023. TPC Benchmark H. https:
//www.tpc.org

[2] Transaction Processing Performance Council. 2023. TPC Benchmark DS. https:
//www.tpc.org

[3] Renzo Angles, Peter Boncz, Josep-Lluis Larriba-Pey, Irini Fundulaki, Thomas
Neumann, Orri Erling, Peter Neubauer, Norbert Martínez-Bazan, Venelin Kotsev,
and Ioan Toma. 2014. The Linked Data Benchmark Council: A graph and RDF
industry benchmarking effort. ACM SIGMOD Record 43 (05 2014), 27–31. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2627692.2627697

[4] Viktor Leis, Bernhard Radke, Andrey Gubichev, Atanas Mirchev, Peter Boncz,
Alfons Kemper, and Thomas Neumann. 2018. Query optimization through the
looking glass, and what we found running the join order benchmark. The VLDB
Journal 27 (2018), 643–668.

[5] Thomas Neumann and Bernhard Radke. 2018. Adaptive Optimization of Very
Large Join Queries. In Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Management of Data (Houston, TX, USA) (SIGMOD ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 677–692. https://doi.org/10.1145/3183713.3183733
